OK, now let's look at another scenario of something that we can do with the Switch statement as of
Java version 14.
Java has added another capability to the Switch statements, and we'll take a look at that now.
So we're going to write a little bit of code, but first, let me explain what we're going to write.
We're going to write a little bit of code that will simulate a small portion of the game of blackjack.
And so I want to make sure that everybody understands the basic way that blackjack works.
So in blackjack, that's a card game.
You use most of the cards of the deck.
I'm not actually sure.
I don't think we use the Joker, though.
The Joker card, I think it's thrown out.
And the whole point of the game of blackjack is that as a player, you will receive cards one at a time
and you're trying to get the numerical value of all of the cards that you receive to equal as close
to 21 as possible without exceeding 21.
If you exceed the numerical value of 21, then you lose.
If someone else is playing with you and they get closer to 21 than you do, then you lose and they win.
So you're trying to get as close to the numerical value of 21 as possible.
So of all of the cards, the number cards have a value, which is equivalent to whatever number is on
it.
So if you have a five of hearts, then that is equal to five.
If you have a three of diamonds, then that is equal to a three and so on.
However, there are also what are called face cards.
The face cards don't have numbers on them.
So in general, the face cards such as the Jack, Queen and King all have a value of 10.
OK, regardless of whether it's a jack, queen or king, it has a value of 10.
However, there's one special card the ace card.
This card can have one of two values, depending on whichever is more beneficial to your position.
It can either be equal to one, or it can be equal to 11.
So in general, if the other cards in your hand, that is the other cards that you already have total
up to 10 points, let's say, and then an ace is added to your hand.
It would be most beneficial for that ace to now be worth 11 points, which would put you exactly at
21 points and now you're done, as opposed to letting the ace be equal to one point, in which case
you would now only have 11 points.
On the other hand, if you happen to have 19 points already and then you get an ace, in that case,
your only option is for the ace to be equal to one point, which would now put you at twenty total points.
Because if you allowed the ace to be worth 11 points, you would go well over the limit of 21 and then
you would automatically lose.
OK.
Sorry for having to go into the long explanation of how blackjack works, but I just wanted to make
sure you understand because those rules of blackjack are are the so-called business logic of the game.
And what we're going to do is to implement a small piece of that logic using a switch.
So what we're going to do is we're going to allow the switch to determine the value of the cards, including
the ace.
All right.
So let's jump in and see how this will work.
OK, so I've cleared out the last class that we were in.
We'll just reuse it.
And the whole point of this will be simply to print out the value of a card.
So we will have a card and we will let that card be represented as a string.
OK, so we're going to have a variable called card, and this card could have a value.
We're going to hard code the value in the program, OK for for now.
So it could have a value of one or three or four or king or jack or whatever.
OK, something like that.
And then we're also going to have another variable which will hold our current total value of our hand.
OK.
So this will just represent the total value of all the cards that we have right now.
And again, we're going to hard code this so that we can play around with different scenarios.
So let's say if our current.
Total value was a 10, and we received a Jack after having a 10.
Then the total value would now be 20.
You get it and then we're going to have a switch statement which will determine the value of this card.
So the way we can do this is we'll set up a switch.
So we're going to tell it, we're going to switch on card.
Like so.
And we need our curly braces to set up this switch block and then we're going to have our cases.
All right, so then we'll have our case.
And so the first case we can have could be the highest one, which is king.
Just like so so we have the word case, then the value that we're comparing to the card in this case
and then a colon.
OK, so now here's where we're going to do things a little bit differently.
We're going to use a slightly different format for the Switch statement.
Now this is a format of the Switch statement that has only been around since Java version 14.
So in earlier versions of Java, you cannot do this well.
Technically, I think it was available as a preview in Java 13, but in general, this capability we're
about to see now has only officially been enabled since Java 14.
Now, if you'll recall, as of the time when I recorded this course, which is around May of 2021,
Java 16 is the current version of Java.
So what we will do is instead of having a colon and then some statement like like, so blah blah blah
and then a break instead of all of that, we will do this.
We will use a an arrow, a hyphen and then a greater than symbol, which together means an arrow.
And then we will simply put a value that we want to return if the card is a king.
So in this case, we want to return a 10 and then a semicolon like this.
Now we're not telling it to print anything.
We're just returning a 10, and so we need to do something with this value if it is a king in this case.
And what we will do is we will capture that so we can treat this whole entire switch block like something
that returns a value, which means we can capture that value so we can have an integer variable.
You can call it current value and then we can actually assign a value just like that.
OK, now we're getting this squiggly line here.
If we hover over it, we can see it, says Switch expression does not cover all possible input values,
and we're just getting this because the IDC sees that we've set this this variable card to Jack.
And we don't we don't have a case covering the value of Jack yet.
So as we continue to fill this out, that will go away.
All right.
So there's the case for a king.
Now, the other cool thing we can do here is in the case of black tax rules, all of the face cards
have an equal value of 10.
So we don't have to make separate lines like this for each of those other face cards.
Instead, what we can do is simply add them all on to this one case line here, like so we can put a
comma and then specify a queen is also a 10 and another comma and say that a jack is also a 10.
So we can do that.
All right.
So now next, let's handle the case of the number cards, OK, and the way we can do that, since there
are many of them and each of them has its own value, which is equivalent to the number that's printed
on the card.
So a two is a two, a three is a three or four is a four and so on and so forth.
I'm inclined to use the default case for all of the rest of the cards.
Like so, so if we do a default like this and then arrow.
Now here's the thing the cards that we're going to receive will be strings, but the current value that
we want to get for a card is a number.
Can you think of how we can go from having a string like like that?
That's a string to having a value that is equivalent to that string, right?
So we have a card that is a string of three.
Now we want to have a current value in this variable here.
That would be a three.
Can you think of how we could translate a string of a three into an integer of a three?
Take a moment and think about it.
OK.
Did you get it all right, so what we can do is to use the one of the numeric wrapper classes, and
in this case, we're dealing with integers.
So I would go integer dot pass int.
And then we can simply pass in the card like so.
So if our card is a three, a string of three, that string of three will be passed and converted into
an integer of three.
And that's what will get stored in here.
However, if it is a king, queen or jack, it will be a 10 that will be stored in the current value.
So you see what we're doing here with the Switch statement and how nice this is.
It's helping to greatly reduce the amount of code we would have had to write, maybe if we were using
and if then else structure.
Now I've saved the best for last.
What about aces?
Aces are a special case, right?
Because I said, if you have an ace, the value could be one or 11, depending on which value is most
beneficial and depending on what your current total value was.
So let's see if we can figure out a way to code that I'm going to put that above the default line here.
So I'm going to make a new line and we're going to have a special case now, ace.
All right.
So for Ace, we're going to do something a little more involved now.
We'll use the arrow here.
But now, instead of just returning a one or an 11, we need a little bit of logic to help us determine
whether we should return a one or an 11.
And the way we can do that is by using curly braces.
And now inside of these curly braces, we can actually type a little more code to figure something out.
So what we basically want to do is pretty simple.
I think we want to say something like if the current total value is less than or equal to 10, or we
could say less than 11, that would be the same thing.
Then let the ace value be 11.
Otherwise, let it be one.
Now, do you want to take a stab at trying to write that logic yourself by pausing and seeing what you
can do?
Go ahead.
OK, so now I'll take a stab at it.
So we want to say if the current total value is less than 11, or I could also say less than or equal
to 10, that would be equivalent.
Either way, less than 11, then.
Now how do we get a value out of this and into here?
If we were in a method, we would use the return statement here.
We'd say something like return, then return 11.
That's what we would do if we were just in a regular method all by itself, like something in here.
However, we're not in just the regular method.
We're inside of the case portion of a switch block and we can't just say return.
It doesn't make any sense to do this.
The return statement allows us to return a value from a function as the output of that function.
But here what we want to do is we want to return a value from the case section of a switch clause.
And so using return doesn't make sense here.
However, again, as of Java 14, the creators of Java have given us a new way to be able to return
a value from within this case clause.
And it's pretty much the same thing as a return, except return means return of value from a method.
And now we need some special word or something that lets us return a value from a case and that special
word is yield.
So we can say yield and 11.
OK.
Just like this.
Now we need to cover the other part of this internal case.
If the current total value is less than 11, then basically yield an 11 else or otherwise
yield a one.
OK.
So let's look at this again now.
So here's our situation we currently have a few cards in our hand whose total value is 10.
And let's say the next card we receive is a king.
So in that case, the switch is going to get called on the king.
That's going to match this first case and it's going to return a 10, which will get stored in the current
value.
And then in a minute here, we'll we'll print that out.
OK.
On the other hand, if it were an ace, then the switch would switch on the word ace, which would come
down to this case here.
And then some additional logic would get executed to check and determine what the value of that ace
card should be.
So if the current total value that is the current total value of all the the all the cards that we had
in our hand before we received an ace.
If the current total value was 10, which is less than 11, then our ace will be worth 11, which would
give us a total of 21.
And you just won.
Otherwise, if the current total value was not less than 11 like it was 19, for example, then our
ace will be worth only one point, which would put us at 20.
And we won't have exceeded the limit of 21 for that for the game.
Does that make sense?
I know this may look a little complicated and what you're going to need to do.
I would encourage you to actually try thinking this through on your own, maybe even try writing this
code again yourself.
But let's go ahead and finish this up.
OK, so we've got one little error here, this little red squiggly here, and that's just telling us
that we need to put a semicolon to close up this switch statement now, because this Switch statement
is now a full statement that's capable of returning a value to this variable.
And so we need a semicolon at the end of it now.
All right.
And next, we can simply print the current value.
OK, so now let's run this and try a few scenarios.
OK, so we can print a few things out now.
Now I think the first thing I want to print out will be the current value of the card we just drew.
Let's do a system that out that format.
And you know, you've never seen me do this.
It's honestly, it's not something I usually use the you f, but I should start using it more frequently.
So you F..
All right.
So then that gives us a system out that print f, which is the same as a system that out that format.
And so let's say in here, current card value colon and then a percent D and a percent in and then a
comma outside of that and then print the current value and then let's also print the total.
Now I'll just do another ASR up here.
Total value Kohen percent the percent in quote comma space.
And now here we'll do a little bit of math.
I suppose we'll do a current total value plus current value.
OK, now we could do this better.
We could capture this and put it in a variable, and probably we should if we were going to do anything
a little more realistic.
But for right now, this is OK.
All right.
Let's run this scenario.
So in this scenario, we start with a value of 10 and then we add an ace to it.
So what we should get is the ace equal to 11, which would put us at 21, which would be perfect, right?
So let's see if that's what happens.
Hey, perfect.
Current card value is 11.
Total value is 21.
All right, now, let's see what happens if we started off with a current total value of 15.
And then we added an ace.
So 15 is greater than 11 or greater than 10.
And therefore, the ace should now be equal to a one so that we don't exceed 21.
Let's see if it works.
Perfect.
Yup.
Current card value is one total value is 16.
That's working perfectly.
OK, now let's see what happens if we have a card that is a six.
All right, very good current card value is six.
Total value is twenty one, right?
15 and six.
Perfect.
And let's try a few of the face cards.
So let's see what happens if we have a king and our current total value is, well, we'll leave it at
15 for right now.
All right.
Current value card value is 10.
Total value is 25.
Now in this.
In this case, you would have automatically lost, which in blackjack terminology, I believe they say
you would have busted.
Now we could put some logic in here to determine whether or not you win or you lose.
Maybe that's something you could add in.
You could have a little conditional logic somewhere.
Now I wouldn't.
It wouldn't be appropriate to put that in here in the switch clause because this is only for determining
the value of this one card.
That's what this whole switch block is doing.
You'd want to have another conditional where you would then take this total, the total total right,
and you'd determine whether or not your new total was 21 or below.
And if it's over 21, then you will have busted.
And you would probably want to use in a conditional block to do that.
So that would be a good exercise for you to try out.
OK, so now I want to just re-emphasize the fact that using the Switch statement in this way to return
a value that we can then do something with, this is a new this is a relatively new way of using the
Switch statement that was added to Java.
14.
OK.
So prior to this, you would not be able to use a switch statement to return and assign a value to something.
The other way that we were using the Switch statement was simply to print various things out or to call
some other code.
You could call other methods or you could execute various statements within the switch clause, but
you couldn't use the switch clause to directly return a value.
OK.
And so that's the innovation of using Switch in this particular way.
Well, also, they've allowed us now to combine multiple constants here that are all going to have the
same value, which is a nice convenience as well.
All right.
That's going to wrap up this lesson on the additional capabilities of the Switch statement, and I will
see you in the next one.